
RFCs and Independent Submissions: Examination and Revision

RFC 4846 defines the Independent Submissions Stream as a document stream within
the RFC series. However, that stream follows very different processes to other
streams. In particular, though the independence of the stream is valued as a
way to ensure that dissenting voices can find a platform that will reach the
greater IETF community, the publication of dissenting opinions on the stream
creates tension with other streams.

The tension between independence and this close relationship with other streams
in the RFC series is rooted in confusion about the status of documents. The RFC
series is dominated by the product of the IETF stream and the properties of
that stream - primarily that they are the consensus of the IETF - are often
assumed for all documents bearing the "RFC" label.

The goal of the Independent Submissions Stream is to provide a venue for
publication of documents that seek the same audience as the RFC series. This
does not require that those documents bear the "RFC" label. Designating a new
label removes any potential for confusion about status.

With a different label, the potential for actual conflict with other streams is
greatly reduced. Consequently, the need for IESG conflict review as defined in
RFC 5742 becomes much less. Removing conflict review reduces IESG workload and
gives the Independent Submissions Editor greater discretion.

The RISER working group will concentrate on a revision or updates to RFC 4846
and RFC 5742. Revision to RFC 4844 and RFC 6548 might also be necessary. The
group will investigate and document changes to the process that enable greater
independence for the operation of the Independent Submissions Editor.
Minimally, this will involve creating a new name for the documents produced on
the Independent Submissions Stream, and removing the conflict review for those
documents. The group will not change the ISE selection and oversight processes.

Milestones

Oct 2018 - Document(s) updating or revising RFCs 4846 and 5742 available for community review