



Network Working Group                                         M. Thomson
Internet-Draft                                                   Mozilla
Intended status: Experimental                              June 25, 2018
Expires: December 27, 2018


                            It's Just a Name
                 draft-thomson-rfcplusplus-name-latest

Abstract

   The perception and reality of the RFC series have long been separate.
   More than 20 years of attempts to correct perception, starting with
   RFC 1796, have been unsuccessful.  Both reality and perception are
   important; so, if one wont change, fix the other.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 27, 2018.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2018 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Thomson                 Expires December 27, 2018               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              It's Just a Name                   June 2018


1.  Introduction

   RFC 1796 [RFCS] was published in April of 1995.  At that time, it was
   clear that there was an "regrettably well spread misconception" that
   the label "RFC" implied "some level of recognition".  That has not
   changed in the 23 intervening years.

   Repairing the common perception of the significance of the "RFC"
   label is clearly a Quixotic endeavour.  Though dishonest, allowing or
   fostering misapprehensions about the significance of the label is
   prevalent.  The result being that the credibility rightfuly earned by
   high quality documents on the RFC Series is to varying degrees
   purloined and undermined by documents of lesser quality.

   The label "RFC" must not be used unless a certain standard is met.
   Documents that do not meet the agreed standard might still be worthy
   of publication, but they should not be granted the same label.

   The Internet Standards Process [RFC2026] describes a process that has
   consistently produced quality documents.  This document proposes an
   experiment that limits the use of the "RFC" label to the product of
   that process.

2.  The Misconception

   Misconceptions about the significance of publication as an RFC is
   commonplace.

   For example, ZRTP [RFC6189] was published as an informational RFC on
   the IETF stream after the IETF reached consensus to publish DTLS-SRTP
   [RFC5764] for the same use case.

   Similarly, HTTP Live Streaming (HLS) [RFC8216] was published on the
   Independent Submissions Stream in defiance of a standardized
   protocol, MPEG-DASH [DASH].

   Both describe de-facto standards, each of which are implemented in
   more than one product and deployed.  Both are also highly contentious
   in their own field.  Neither can claim to be standards, but both
   happily claim to be RFCs.

   Both have a stable presence on the Internet where specifications are
   published (http://zfoneproject.com/zrtp_ietf.html [1] and
   https://developer.apple.com/streaming/ [2] respectively).  Indeed,
   both websites publish links to updated specifications ([ZRTPBIS] and
   [HLSBIS]).





Thomson                 Expires December 27, 2018               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              It's Just a Name                   June 2018


3.  Why Publish as RFC?

   So why is the publication of an RFC so keenly sought?  As someone
   recently said:

      If they weren't labelled "RFC" nobody would care about them.

   So clearly the label carries some significance.

   If the label "RFC" were not important, you might seek a more
   principled reason for publication.  It might be reasonable to say
   that the goal is to create a stable, referenceable specification for
   a technology that might be of interest to the Internet community.
   This view is consistent with the rationale given in the Section 2 of
   [RFC4846], which formalized the Independent Submissions Stream.

   For the examples given, the principled reasons for publication appear
   to be justified.  The former document is the by-product of the IETF,
   the latter a use of an IETF protocol.  While neither represents IETF
   consensus, the claim is undeniably true.

   However, it's not obvious that this goal is not already accomplished
   by publishing specifications on a web site.  The only question is one
   of stability, a problem solved by the Internet Archive
   (https://web.archive.org/ [3]).  That remains even if the Internet
   Archive did not already show that the sites for the identified
   specifications have been available and stable for an extended period.

   On the other hand, using the label "RFC" fosters the misconception
   that these documents hold some special status.

   ZRTP in particular demonstrates the significance of labelling.
   Recent specifications adopted by IETF working groups cite RFC 6189
   normatively.  This suggests that even those most likely to understand
   the relevance of the status of an RFC have attributed greater
   credibility to this RFC than is due.  This is not supported by
   widespread deployment of ZRTP.

   Of course, the potential for misconceptions about provenance is not
   limited to documents within the RFC series.  Claims that Internet-
   Drafts speak for the IETF are still commonplace, but there is no risk
   of an Internet-Draft being mistaken for an RFC from its name alone.

   Even assuming that the Internet is improved by enabling
   interoperation on alternative protocols, if that were the goal, that
   would be achieved by publication on a web site.  However, it's more
   likely that alternative protocols fracture markets, make products
   more complex and expensive, and overall do more harm than good.



Thomson                 Expires December 27, 2018               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              It's Just a Name                   June 2018


   The primary benefit in documenting alternative protocols is in
   capturing aspects of their design, so that techniques might be
   examined and learned from.  None of that depends on using the label
   "RFC".

4.  The Value of Consensus

   The reputation associated with the label "RFC" derives largely from
   the quality of the documents published under that banner.

   The quality of RFCs varies, as might be expected when there are more
   than 8000 documents.  Whether or not a document is officially a
   standard, the value of a protocol specification derives from its
   ability to codify agreement.

   The stated preference of the IETF for "running code" is based on a
   desire to have its output match reality.  Ideally, an RFC describes
   both an agreement in principle and an agreement with the protocol as
   deployed.  That the RFC Series contains a significant number of such
   documents is why the reputation associated with "RFC" label is so
   strong.

   At publication, some RFCs might only codify an agreement in priciple,
   with an intent to deploy.  That is a weaker state, but this might be
   a temporary condition as the protocol is eventually rolled out.

   In either case, the value of an RFC derives more from the agreement
   it represents than from its manifestation as a number attached to a
   document.  If the agreement exists, there is value.  This value does
   not depend on the label that is applied.

5.  Why Publish IETF Consensus as RFCs?

   Publication as an RFC comes with a number of limitations that do not
   all act in service of the goal of documenting agreement.

   The format is restrictive, even arcane, recent improvements
   [XML3RFCv3] notwithstanding.

   The immutability of an RFC is both restrictive and cumbersome.
   Errors are impossible to correct, and the errata process is a poor
   method for recording necessary amendments.  This creates a tendency
   toward caution in the hopes of committing to an error.

   Even an approved document can take considerable time to be allocated
   an RFC number.  Of the 119 documents currently awaiting publication
   (see https://www.rfc-editor.org/current_queue.php [4]), 26 have been
   waiting for a year or longer, and the median time is 3 months.  Even



Thomson                 Expires December 27, 2018               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              It's Just a Name                   June 2018


   disregarding missing references, which is the primary reason for
   delays, at the median, publications have been waiting 41 days to be
   published.

   The best reason to publish an RFC is because that is how the IETF
   codifies agreement.  That an RFC captures the conclusion of the
   Internet Standards Process is valuable because that process is
   valuable.

   The IETF could choose to publish via other means.  The IETF also has
   a website.  But there is an expectation that the IETF publishes RFCs.
   To diverge from that would - at a minimum - be a violation of that
   expectation.  If the goal is to reconcile reality with perception,
   establishing a new document series would be in direct opposition to
   that goal.

6.  Have RFC Mean Consensus

   Reserving the "RFC" label for those documents that are the product of
   a consistent process is the most effective way to align perception
   and reality.  The Internet Standards Process [RFC2026] is the obvious
   process to use.

   It's true that the Internet Standards Process isn't perfect and it
   cannot guarantee a particular level of quality.  But quality is less
   important than fidelity.  The Internet Standards Process is the best
   means we have for reaching and documenting agreement.

   Reserving the RFC Series for the publication of products of the
   Internet Standards Process would align reality with perception.

7.  New Labels for Other Documents

   The IETF publishes informational and experimental documents.  The
   expectations around what level of agreement is necessary to publish
   these documents is far less than those that it publishes on the
   standards track and so these documents should use other labels.  This
   is especially true for documents that don't represent the consensus
   of the community, such as [EFFECT].

   The IETF publishes best current practice (BCP) documents that
   describe its own processes.  These don't codify agreement about a
   protocol inasmuch as they don't describe something implemented in
   software.  They do follow the same processes and require similar
   levels of agreement.  Use of the RFC label for BCP documents is
   appropriate, though there is no inherent reason not to use another
   label, particularly if other labels are created for documents from
   different sources.



Thomson                 Expires December 27, 2018               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              It's Just a Name                   June 2018


   Similarly, the IRTF and IAB produce documents that do not represent
   an agreement in the same way.  These documents should use other
   labels.

   The possible exception to this are the documents produced by the
   Crypto-Forum Research Group (CFRG).  If it is considered important to
   publish CFRG documents with the "RFC" label, then it should be
   possible to attain IETF consensus for publication in the RFC Series.

   The Independent Submissions Editor also currently publishes RFCs.
   These documents should use different labels.

8.  Nothing Short of a New Label Works

   Almost every RFC published in the last 35 years contains a prominent
   "Status of this Memo" section.  Recent documents include a markings
   in the header, signifying the stream and status (or category).  In
   addition, the most widely used source for RFCs,
   https://tools.ietf.org/html/ [5], uses a colour-coding scheme to
   highlight the status of documents.

   This clearly hasn't worked.

   The use of subseries labels like "STD" have been ineffectual (see
   Appendix A).  The BCP subseries has been more effective, perhaps
   because of the greater familiarity of its primary audience with its
   meaning.

   It's possible that with a move to presenting RFCs in HTML rather than
   text, new methods of signaling status could be developed.  For
   instance, using colour-coding to represent origin and status, or
   rendering documents that aren't on the standards track using Comic
   Sans.  This ignores the fact that the choice of rendering is not part
   of the canonical XML document.  Alternative renderings could
   legitimately erase that information.

   That leads to the conclusion that better labelling, while possibly
   helpful, would not be sufficiently effective in correcting
   misconceptions.

9.  No Change to Existing Documents

   There is no point in revising existing documents.  These documents
   were published with an expectation of immutability.  Thus, any
   attempt to relabel these would be limited to changing document
   metadata.  That has already proven to be ineffectual.





Thomson                 Expires December 27, 2018               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              It's Just a Name                   June 2018


   Any misconception that might exist in relation to existing documents
   is therefore irreparable.  There is no rational means of retracting
   the issuance of RFC numbers for the hundreds of documents that might
   need to be assigned new labels retrospectively.  The simplest thing
   to do is to not worry about this problem.

10.  How To Measure Success

   The use of new labels has been proposed as an experiment.  An
   experiment ends when you have accumulated enough evidence to support
   or disprove the hypothesis.  In this case, the hypothesis being that
   publication as RFC is sought more for the ability to acquire the
   label than any principled reason.

   The proposed experiment changes just one variable: the choice of
   label for newly published documents.  The challenge is in measuring
   the effect of that change.

   This document proposes several tests, most of which rely on
   observations about the Independent Submissions Stream.  This stream
   is chosen because of its independence from the IETF stream and for
   the relative volume of publication, which historically exceeds that
   of the IAB or IRTF streams.

   As has been said about this experiment in relation to the Independent
   Submissions Stream:

      Most likely, the new series would be devalued and would fade away.

   If this is true, and the value of publication as RFC derives largely
   from the label, then it should be possible to observe the effect of
   the experiment on that stream.

   In the first test, the rate of requests for publication on the
   Independent Submissions Stream over time is recorded.  If the
   introduction of the experiment causes the number to drop relative to
   longer-term trends, then we have some information about the reasons
   for seeking publication.

   The second test will record the number of documents published by the
   Independent Submissions Editor (ISE) using the new label.  A drop in
   this rate relative to that of those documents published with the
   "RFC" label could also indicate that a change of label has some
   effect.

   The rate of submissions to that stream is not generally very high,
   meaning that any measurement is susceptible to noise.  There is also




Thomson                 Expires December 27, 2018               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              It's Just a Name                   June 2018


   the potential for novelty effects to drive up demand in the short
   term.

   Aside from these concrete measures, it is certain that copious
   amounts of anecdotal evidence will be brought to bear.

11.  Security and Privacy Considerations

   It's quite possible that there are no considerations of note.

12.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

13.  References

13.1.  Informative References

   [DASH]     "Dynamic adaptive streaming over HTTP (DASH)", ISO/
              IEC 23009-1, May 2014.

   [EFFECT]   Moriarty, K. and A. Morton, "Effects of Pervasive
              Encryption on Operators", draft-mm-wg-effect-encrypt-25
              (work in progress), March 2018.

   [HLSBIS]   Pantos, R., "HTTP Live Streaming 2nd Edition", draft-
              pantos-hls-rfc8216bis-02 (work in progress), June 2018.

   [NEWTRK-RFC]
              Rosenberg, J. and A. Mankin, "What's In a Name: RFC",
              draft-rosenberg-mankin-newtrk-rfc-00 (work in progress),
              October 2004.

   [ONESIZE]  Loughney, J. and S. Dawkins, "A Single-Stage Standards
              Process", draft-loughney-newtrk-one-size-fits-all-01 (work
              in progress), March 2006.

   [RFC2026]  Bradner, S., "The Internet Standards Process -- Revision
              3", BCP 9, RFC 2026, DOI 10.17487/RFC2026, October 1996,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2026>.

   [RFC4846]  Klensin, J., Ed. and D. Thaler, Ed., "Independent
              Submissions to the RFC Editor", RFC 4846,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4846, July 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4846>.






Thomson                 Expires December 27, 2018               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              It's Just a Name                   June 2018


   [RFC5764]  McGrew, D. and E. Rescorla, "Datagram Transport Layer
              Security (DTLS) Extension to Establish Keys for the Secure
              Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP)", RFC 5764,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC5764, May 2010,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5764>.

   [RFC6189]  Zimmermann, P., Johnston, A., Ed., and J. Callas, "ZRTP:
              Media Path Key Agreement for Unicast Secure RTP",
              RFC 6189, DOI 10.17487/RFC6189, April 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6189>.

   [RFC8216]  Pantos, R., Ed. and W. May, "HTTP Live Streaming",
              RFC 8216, DOI 10.17487/RFC8216, August 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8216>.

   [RFCS]     Huitema, C., Postel, J., and S. Crocker, "Not All RFCs are
              Standards", RFC 1796, DOI 10.17487/RFC1796, April 1995,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc1796>.

   [XML3RFCv3]
              Hoffman, P., "The "xml2rfc" Version 3 Vocabulary",
              RFC 7991, DOI 10.17487/RFC7991, December 2016,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7991>.

   [ZRTPBIS]  Zimmermann, P., Johnston, A., and T. Cross, "ZRTP: Media
              Path Key Agreement for Unicast Secure RTP", draft-
              zimmermann-rfc6189bis-00 (work in progress), July 2016.

13.2.  URIs

   [1] http://zfoneproject.com/zrtp_ietf.html

   [2] https://developer.apple.com/streaming/

   [3] https://web.archive.org/

   [4] https://www.rfc-editor.org/current_queue.php

   [5] https://tools.ietf.org/html/

Appendix A.  The STD Subseries

   The assignment of documents to the "STD" subseries has been
   ineffective.  The label "STD" is effectively invisible and
   irrelevant.  For most purposes, a document at the level of Proposed
   Standard is adequate.  Indeed, it is often remarked that the Internet
   runs on Internet-Drafts.




Thomson                 Expires December 27, 2018               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              It's Just a Name                   June 2018


   This is not a new observation [ONESIZE], but time has not diminished
   its relevance.  This is likely due to the relative difficulty of
   progressing a specification to Internet Standard.  As of the time of
   writing there are 81 documents designated as STD.  New entries are
   added a rate generally not exceeding 5 in a year by date of RFC
   publication, with the exception of 15 RFCs published in 1983.  Given
   that there are approximately 300 RFCs published each year, the rate
   of progressing to Internet Standard is extremely low.

   Of course, some documents on the STD subseries are of questionable
   value on the modern Internet and some might be better with a Historic
   demarcation.

   This document intentionally does not aim to address this with a more
   comprehensive set of changes.  Making multiple changes can compromise
   an experiment.

Acknowledgments

   This isn't really a new position.  It's a little embarrassing to find
   that all these arguments are merely a reiteration of arguments
   articulated more than a decade ago.  [NEWTRK-RFC] contains many of
   the same arguments.

Author's Address

   Martin Thomson
   Mozilla

   Email: martin.thomson@gmail.com





















Thomson                 Expires December 27, 2018              [Page 10]
